What is purpose specification and why is it necessary?
Personal data must be collected for specified purposes. The controller must therefore carefully consider what purpose or purposes the personal data will be used for, and must not collect personal data which are not necessary, adequate or relevant for the purpose or purposes which are intended to be served.
Purpose specification lies at the core of the legal framework established for the protection of personal data. In order to determine whether data processing complies with the law, and to establish what data protection safeguards should be applied, it is a necessary precondition to identify the specific purpose(s) for which the collection of personal data is required. Purpose specification thus sets limits on the purposes for which controllers may use the personal data collected, and also helps establish the necessary data protection safeguards.
Purpose specification requires an internal assessment carried out by the data controller and is a necessary condition for accountability. It is a key first step that a controller should follow to ensure compliance with applicable data protection law. The controller must identify what the purposes are, and must also document, and be able to demonstrate, that it has carried out this internal assessment.
At what time should the purposes be specified? Article 6(1)(b) of the Directive requires that personal data be ‘collected’ for specified, explicit and legitimate purposes.32 Thus, it can be inferred that the purposes must be specified prior to, and in any event, not later than, the time when the collection of personal data occurs.
What if personal data are collected for more than one purpose?
Personal data can be collected for more than one purpose. In some cases, these purposes, while distinct, are nevertheless related to some degree. In other cases the purposes may be unrelated. A question that arises here is to what extent the controller should specify each of these distinct purposes separately, and how much additional detail should be provided.38
For ‘related’ processing operations, the concept of an overall purpose, under whose umbrella a number of separate processing operations take place, can be useful.39 That said, controllers should avoid identifying only one broad purpose in order to justify various further processing activities which are in fact only remotely related to the actual initial purpose.
Ultimately, in order to ensure compliance with Article 6(1)(b), each separate purpose should be specified in enough detail to be able to assess whether collection of personal data for this purpose complies with the law, and to establish what data protection safeguards to apply40.

In order for the purposes to be legitimate, the processing must - at all different stages and at all times - be based on at least one of the legal grounds provided for in Article 7.51 However, the requirement that the purposes must be legitimate is broader than the scope of Article 7. In
addition, Article 6(1)(b) also requires that the purposes must be in accordance with all provisions of applicable data protection law, as well as other applicable laws such as employment law, contract law, consumer protection law, and so on. The requirement of legitimacy means that the purposes must be 'in accordance with the law' in the broadest sense. This includes all forms of written and common law, primary and secondary legislation, municipal decrees, judicial precedents, constitutional principles, fundamental rights, other legal principles, as well as jurisprudence, as such 'law' would be interpreted and taken into account by competent courts.

Assessment of compatibility
The notion of 'further' processing: any processing following collection, whether for the purposes initially specified or for any additional purposes, must be considered 'further processing' and must thus meet the requirement of compatibility.
The notion of incompatibility: Rather than imposing a requirement of compatibility, the legislator chose a double negation: it prohibited incompatibility. By providing that any further processing is authorised as long as it is not incompatible (and if the requirements of lawfulness are simultaneously also fulfilled), it would appear that the legislators intended to give some flexibility with regard to further use. Such further use may fit closely with the initial purpose or be different. The fact that the further processing is for a different purpose does not necessarily mean that it is automatically incompatible: this needs to be assessed on a case-by-case basis, as will be shown below.
In some situations, this additional flexibility may be needed to allow for a change of scope or focus in situations where the expectations of society - or of the data subjects themselves - have changed about what additional use the data may be put to. It is also possible that when initially specifying the purpose, neither the controller nor the data subject thought additional purposes would be necessary, although it subsequently transpired that the data could indeed be very useful for other things. In some of these (and similar) situations, a change of purpose may be permissible, and further processing may be considered not incompatible, provided that the compatibility test is satisfied.
